Title: Buy the Dip: The Draw and Dangers of Contrarian Investing!
Source: Aswath Damodaran Valuation Blog
URL: https://aswathdamodaran.blogspot.com/2025/04/buy-dip-draw-and-dangers-of-contrarian.html
Date: 2025-04-20T21:48:00-04:00
Author: Aswath Damodaran
Type: blog_post
Category: relative_valuation

---

When
markets are in free fall, there is a great deal of  advice that is meted out to investors, and one is to
just buy the dip
, i.e., buy beaten down stocks, in the hope that they will recover, or the entire market, if it is down.  "Buying the dip" falls into a broad group of investment strategies that can be classified as "contrarian", where investors act in contrast to what the rest of the market is doing at the time, buying (selling) when the vast majority are selling (buying) , and it has been around through all of market history. There are strands of research in both behavioral finance and empirical studies that back up contrarian strategies, but as with everything to do with investing, it comes with caveats and constraints. In this post, I will posit that contrarian investing can take different forms, each based on different assumptions about market behavior, and present the evidence that we have on the successes and failures of each one. I will argue that even if you are swayed intellectually by the arguments for going against the crowd, it may not work for you, if you are not psychologically attuned to the stresses and demands that contrarian strategies bring with them.
Contrarianism - The Different Strands
All contrarian investing is built around a common theme of buying an investment, when its price goes down significantly, but there are wide variations in how it is practiced. In the first,
knee-jerk contrarianism
, you use a bludgeon, buying either individual companies or the entire market when they are down, on the expectation that you will benefit from an inevitable recovery in prices. In the second,
technical contrarianism
, you buy beaten-up stocks or the entire market, but only if charting or technical indicators support the decision.  In the third,
constrained contrarianism
, you buy the stocks that are down, but only if they pass your screens for qualify and safety. In the fourth,
opportunistic contrarianism
, you use a price markdown as an opportunity to buy companies that you have always wanted to hold, but had not been able to buy because they were priced too high.
1. Knee-jerk Contrarianism
The simplest and most direct version of contrarian investing is to buy any traded asset where the price is down substantially from its highs, with the asset sometimes being an individual company, sometimes a sector and sometimes the entire market. Implicit in this strategy is an absolute belief in mean reversion, i.e.,  that what goes down will almost always go back up, and that buying at the beaten down price and being willing to wait will therefore pay off.
The evidence for this strategy comes from many sources. For the market, it is often built on papers (or books) that look at the historical data on what equity markets have delivered as returns over long periods, relative to what you would have made investing elsewhere. Using data for the United States, a  market with the longest and most reliable historical records, you can see the substantial payoff to investing in equities:
Download historical data
No matter what time period you use for your time horizon, stocks deliver the highest returns, of all asset classes, and there some who look at this record and conclude that "stocks always win in the long term", with the implication that you should stay fully invested in stocks, even through the worst downturns, if you have a reasonably long time horizon. These returns to buying stocks become greater, when you buy them when they are cheaper, measured either through pricing metrics (low PE ratios) or after corrections. There are two problems with the conclusion. The first is that there is
selection bias
, where using historical data from the United States, one of the most successful equity markets of the last century, to draw general conclusions about the risk and returns of investing in equities will lead you to underestimate equity risk and overestimate equity returns. The second is that, even with US equities, an investor who bought stocks just before a major downturn
would have to wait a long time before being made whole again.
Thus, investors who put their money in stocks in 1929, just ahead of the Great Depression, would not have recovered until 1954.
With individual stocks, the strongest backing for buying the dip comes from studies of "loser" stocks, i.e., stocks that have gone down the most over a prior period. In a
widely cited paper from 1985, DeBondt and Thaler
classified stocks based upon stock price performance in the prior three years into winner and loser portfolios, with the top fifty performers going into the "winner" portfolio, and the bottom fifty into the "losers portfolio", and estimated the returns you could have made on each group in the following thirty six months:
DeBondt and Thaler (1985)
As you can see, the loser portfolio dramatically outperforms the winner portfolio, delivering about 30% more on a cumulative basis than the winner portfolio in the thirty six months after the portfolios are created, which DeBondt and Thaler argued was evidence that markets overreact. About a decade later,
Jegadeesh and Titman
revisited the study, with more granular data on time horizons, and found that the results were reversed, if you shorten the holding period, with winner stocks continuing to win over the first year after portfolio creation.
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
The reversal eventually kicks in after a year, but over the entire time period, the winner portfolio still outperforms the loser portfolio, on a cumulative basis. Jegadeesh and Titman also noted a skew in the loser portfolio towards smaller market cap and lower-priced stocks, with higher transactions costs (from bid-ask spreads and price impact). As other studies have added to the mix, the consensus on winner versus loser stocks is that there is no consensus, with evidence for both momentum, with winner stocks continuing to win, and for reversal, with loser stocks outperforming, depending on time horizon, and questions about whether these excess returns are large enough to cover the transactions costs involved.
Setting aside the mixed evidence for the moment, the biggest danger in knee-jerk contrarian investing at the market level is that buying the dip in the market is akin to catching a falling knife, since that initial market drop can be a prelude to a much larger sell off, and to the extent that there was an economic or fundamental reason for the sell off (a banking crisis, a severe recession), there may be no near term bounceback. With individual stocks, that danger gets multiplied, with investors buying stocks that are being sold off to for legitimate reasons (a broken business model, dysfunctional management, financial distress) and waiting for a market correction that never comes.
To examine the kinds of companies that you would invest in, with a knee-jerk contrarian investing strategy , I looked at all US stocks with a market capitalization exceeding a billion dollars on December 31, 2024, and found the companies that were the biggest losers, on a percent basis,
between March 28 and April 18 of 2025:
You will note that technology and biotechnology firms are disproportionately represented on the list, but that is the by-product of a bludgeon approach.
2. Technical Contrarianism
In technical contrarianism, you start with the same basis as knee-jerk contrarianism, by  looking at stocks and markets that have dropped significantly, but with
an added requirement that the price has to meet a charting or technical indicator constraint before becoming a buy
. While there are many who consign technical analysis to voodoo investing, I believe that charting patterns and technical indicators can provide signals of shifts in mood and momentum that drive price movements, at least in the near term. Thus, you can view technical contrarianism as buying stocks or markets when they are down, but only if the charts and technical indicators point to a shift in market mood.
One of the problems with testing technical contrarianism, to see if it works, is that even among technical analysts, there seems to be no consensus as to the best indicator to use, but broadly speaking, these indicators can be based on
either price and/or volume movements
. They range in sophistication from simple measures like relative strength (where you look at percentage price changes over a period) and moving averages to complex ones that combine price and volume. In recent decades, investors have added pricing in other markets to the mix, with the VIX (a traded volatility index) as well as the relative pricing of puts and calls in the options market being used in market timing. In sum, all of these indicators are directed at measuring fear in the market, with a "market capitulation" viewed as a sign that the market has bottomed out.
With market timing indicators, there is research backing up the use of VIX and trading volume as predictors of market movements, though with substantial error.
Source: S&P
As the VIX rises, the expected return on stocks in future periods goes up, albeit with much higher volatility around these expected returns. It is ironic that some of the best defenses of technical analysis have been offered by academics, especially in their studies of price momentum and reversal.
Lo, Wang, and Mamaysky
present a fairly convincing defense of technical analysis from the perspective of financial economists. They use daily returns of stocks on the New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ from 1962 and 1996 and employ sophisticated computational techniques (rather than human visualization) to look for pricing patterns. They find that the most common patterns in stocks are double tops and bottoms, followed by the widely used head and shoulders pattern. In other words, they find evidence that some of the most common patterns used by technical analysts exist in prices. Lest this be cause for too much celebration among chartists, they also point out that these patterns offer only marginal incremental returns (an academic code word for really small) and offer the caveat that these returns may not survive transaction costs.
3. Constrained Contrarianism
If you are in the old-time value investing camp, your approach to contrarian investing will reflect that worldview, where you will buy stocks that have dropped in value, but only if they meet the other criteria that you have for good companies. In short, you will start with a list of beaten up stocks, and then screen them for
high profitability, strong moats and low risk
, hoping to separate companies that are cheap from those that deserve to be cheap.
As a constrained contrarian, you are
hoping to avoid value traps
, every value investor's nightmare , where a company looks cheap on a pricing basis (low PE, low price to book) and proceeds to become even cheaper after you buy it. The evidence on whether screening helps avoid value traps comes largely from studies of the interplay between proxies of value (such as low price to book ratios) and proxies for quality, including measures for both operating/capital efficiency (margins and returns on capital) and low risk (low debt ratios and volatility). Proponents of quality screens note that while value proxies alone no longer seem to deliver excess returns, incorporating quality screens seems to preserve these excess returns.  Research Affiliates, an investment advisory service, looked at returns to pure value screens versus value plus quality screens and presents the following evidence on how screening for quality improves returns:
Research Affiliates Study
The evidence is supportive of the hypothesis that adding quality screens improves returns, and does so more for stocks that look cheap (low price to book) than for expensive stocks. That said, the evidence is underwhelming in terms of payoff, at least on an annual return basis, though the payoff is greater, if you factor in volatility and estimate Sharpe ratios (scaling annual return to volatility).
While much of the research on quality has been built around value and small cap investing, the findings can be extrapolated to contrarian investing, with the lesson being that rather than buy the biggest losers, you should be buying the losers that pass screening tests for high
profitability (high returns on equity or capital) and low risk (low debt ratios and volatility). That may provide a modicum of protection, but the problem with these screens is that they are based upon historical data and do not capture structural changes in the economy or disruption in the industry, both of which have not yet found their way into the fundamentals that are in your screens.
To provide just an illustration of constrained contrarianism, I again returned to the universe of about 6,000 publicly traded US stocks on April 18, 2025, and after removing firms with market capitalizations less than $100 million (with the rationale that these companies will have more liquidity risk and transactions costs), I screened first for stocks that lost more than 20% of their market capitalization between March 28 and April 18, and then added three value screens:
A
PE ratio less than 15
, putting the stock in the bottom quintile of US stocks as of December 31, 2024
A
dividend yield that exceeded 1%
, a paltry number by historical norms, but ensuring that the company was dividend-paying in 2024, a year in which 60% of US stocks paid no dividends
A
net debt/EBITDA ratio of less than two
, dropping it into the bottom quintile of US companies in terms of debt load
The six companies that made it through the screens are below:
I am sure that if you are a value investor, you will disagree about both the screens that I used as well as my cut offs, but you are welcome to experiment with your own screens to find bargains.
4. Opportunistic Contrarianism
In a fourth variant of contrarian investing, you use a market meltdown as an opportunity to buy companies that you
have always wanted to own but could not because they were over priced before the price drop, but look under priced after.  The best place to start an assessment of opportunistic investing is with my post on
why good companies are not always good investments,
with the first being determined by all of the considerations that go into separating great businesses from bad businesses, including growth and profitability, and the second by the price you have to pay to buy them. In that post, I had a picture drawing the contrast between good companies and good investments:
Put simply, most great companies are neutral or even bad investments, because the market prices them to be great. A year ago, when I
valued the Mag Seven stock
s, I argued that these were, for the most part, great businesses, with a combination of growth at scale, high profitability and deep moats, but that at the prices that they were trading  they were not great investments.
I also argued that even great companies have their market travails, where for periods of time, investors lose faith in them and drive their prices down not just to value, but below. It happened to Microsoft in 2014, Apple in 2017, Nvidia in 2018, Tesla at multiple times in the last decade, and to
Facebook, at the height of the Metaverse fiasco
. While those corrections were caused by company-specific news stories and issues, the same process can play out, when you have significant market markdowns, as we have had over the last few weeks.
The process of opportunistic contrarianism starts well before a market correction, with the identification of companies that you believe are good or great businesses:
At the time that you first value them, you are likely to find them to be over valued, which will undoubtedly be frustration. You may be tempted to play with the numbers to make these companies look undervalued, but a better path is to put them  on your list of companies you would like to own, and leave them there. During a market crisis, and especially when investors are marking down the prices of everything, without discriminating between good and bad companies, you should revisit that list, with a caveat that
you cannot compare the post-correction price to your pre-crisis valuation of your company.
Instead, you will have to revalue the company, with adjustments to expected cash flows and risk premiums, given the crisis, and if that value exceeds the price, you should buy the stock.
Contrarian Investing: The Psychological Tests!
In the abstract, it is easy to understand the appeal of contrarian investing. Both behavioral and empirical research identify the existence of herd behavior in crowds, and point to tipping points where crowd wisdom becomes crowd madness. A rational decision-maker in the midst of animal spirits may feel that he or she has an advantage in this setting, and rightly so. That said, buying when the rest of the market is selling takes a mindset, a time horizon and a stronger stomach than most of us do not have.
The Mindset
: Investing against the market will not come easily to those who are easily swayed by peer pressure, since they will have to buy, just as other investors (the peer group) will be selling, and often in companies that the market has turned against. There are  some who march to their own drummers, willing to take a path that is different from the rest, and these are better suited to being contrarians.
The Time Horizon
: To be a contrarian, you don't always need a long time horizon, since corrections can sometimes happen quickly, but you have to be willing to wait for a long period, if that is what is necessary for the correction. Relatively few investors have this capacity, since it is determined as much by your circumstances (age, health and cash needs) as it is by your personality.
The Stomach
: Even if your buy decision is based on the best thought-through contrarian investing strategies, it is likely that in the aftermath of that decision, momentum will continue to push prices down, testing your faith. Without a strong stomach, you will capitulate, and while your decision may have been right in the long term, your investment will not reflect that success.
As you can see, the decision on whether to be a contrarian is not just one that you can make based upon the evidence and theory, but will depend on who you are as a person, and your makeup.
I have the luxury of a long time horizon and the luck of a strong stomach, for both food and market surprises. I am not easily swayed by peer pressure, but I am not immune from it either. I know that buying stocks in the face of market selling will not come easily, and that is the reason that I initiated limit buys on three companies that I have wanted to have in my portfolio, BYD, the Chinese electric car maker, Mercado Libre, the Latin American online retail/fintech firm, and Palantir, a company that I believe is closest to delivering on thee promise of AI products and services. The limit buy kicked in on BYD on April 7, when it briefly dipped below $80,  my limit price, and while Palantir and Mercado Libre have a way to go before they hit my price limits, the crisis is young and the order is good until canceled!
YouTube Video