Title: Data Update 2 for 2025: The Party Continued (for US Equities)
Source: Aswath Damodaran Valuation Blog
URL: https://aswathdamodaran.blogspot.com/2025/01/data-update-2-for-2025-party-continued.html
Date: 2025-01-17T16:42:00-05:00
Author: Aswath Damodaran
Type: blog_post
Category: risk

---

In
my last post
, I noted that the US has extended its dominance of global equities in recent years, increasing its share of market capitalization from 42% in at the start of 2023 to 44% at the start of 2024 to 49% at the start of 2025. That rise was driven by a surge in US equity values during 2024, with the S&P 500 delivering returns of close to 25%, all the more impressive, given that the index delivered returns in excess of 26% in 2023. In this post, I will zero in on US equities, in the aggregate, first by looking at month-by-month returns during 2024, and then putting their performance in the last two years in a historical context. I will follow up by trying to judge where markets stand at the start of 2025, starting with PE ratios, moving on to earnings yields and ending with a valuation of the index.
US Equities in 2024
Entering 2024, there was trepidation about where stocks would go during the year especially coming off a a strong bounce back year in 2023, and there remained real concerns about inflation and a recession. The hopeful note was that the Fed would lower the Fed Funds rate during the course of the year, triggering (at least in the minds of Fed watchers) lower interest rates across the yield curve, Clearly, the market not only fought through those concerns, but did so in the face of rising treasury rates, especially at the long end of the spectrum.
While the market was up strongly for the year, it is worth remembering that the there were months during 2024, where the market looked shaky, as can be seen in the month to month returns on the S&P 500 during the course of 2024:
The market’s weakest month was April 2024, and it ended the year or a weak note, down 2.50% in December. Overall, though the index was up 23.31% for the year, and adding the dividend yield of 1.57% (based upon the expected dividends for 2025 and the index at the start of the years) yields a total return 24.88% for the year:
As is almost always the case, the bulk of the returns from equity came from price appreciation, with the caveat that the dividend yield portion has shrunk over the last few decades in the United States.
Historical Context
To assess stock returns in 2024, it makes sense to step back and put the year's performance into historical perspective. In the graph below, I look at returns (inclusive of dividends) on the S&P 500 every year from 1928 to 2024.
Download historical data
Across the 97 years that I have estimated annual returns, stocks have had their ups and downs, delivering positive returns in 71 years and negative returns in the other 26 years. The worst year in history was 1931, with stocks returning -43.84%, and the best year was 1954, when the annual return was 52.56%. If you wanted to pick a benchmark to compare annual returns to pass judgment on whether a year was above or below average, you can can go with either the annual return (11.79%) or the median return (14.82%) across the entire time period.
Looking at the 24.88% return in 2024 in terms of rankings, it ranks as the 27th best year across the last 97 years, indicating that while it was a good year, there have been far better years for US stocks. Combining 2023 and 2024 returns yield a cumulative a two-year return for the S&P 500 of 57.42%, making it one the ten best two-year periods in US market history.
The riskless alternative to investing in US stocks during this period, in US dollar terms, are US treasuries, and in 2024, that contest was won, hands down, by US equities:
Equity risk premium earned in 2024, over 3-month  treasury bills
= Return on stocks - Return on 3-month treasuries (averaged over 2024)
= 24.88% -4.97% = 19.91%
Equity risk premium earned in 2024, over 10-year treasuries
= Return on stocks - Return on 10-year treasury
= 24.88% -(-1.64%) = 26.52%
The ten-year treasury return was negative, because treasury bond rates rose during 2024.
Equity risk premiums are volatile over time, and averaging them makes sense, and in the table below, I look at the premium that stocks have earned over treasury bills and treasury bonds, going back to 1928, using both
simple averages
(of the returns each year) and
geometric averages
(reflecting the compounding effect):
Download historical data
These returns are
nominal returns
, and inflation would have taken a bite out of returns each year. Computing the returns in
real terms
, by taking out inflation in each year from that year's returns, and recomputing the equity risk premiums:
Download historical data
Note that the equity risk premiums move only slightly, because inflation finds its way into both stock and treasury returns.
Many valuation practitioners use these historical averages, when forecasting equity risk premiums in the future, but it is a practice that deserves scrutiny, partly because it is
backward looking
(with the expectation that things will revert back to the way they used to be), but mostly because the estimates that you get for the equity risk premium
have significant error terms
(see standard errors listed below the estimates in the table). Thus, if are using the average equity risk premium for the last 97 years of 5.44% (7.00%), i.e., the arithmetic or geometric averages, it behooves you to also inform users that the standard error of 2.12% will create a range of about 4% on either side of the estimate.
Pricing Questions
Coming into 2025, investors are right to be trepidatious, for many reasons, but mostly because we are coming off two extraordinarily good years for the market, and a correction seems due. That is, however, a poor basis for market timing, because stock market history is full of examples to the contrary. There are other metrics, though, which are signaling danger, and in this section, I will wrestle with what they tell us about stocks in 2025.
PE ratios and Earnings Yields
Even as we get new and updated pricing metrics, it is undeniable that the most widely used metric of stock market cheapness or expensiveness is the price earnings ratio, albeit with variations in the earning number that goes into the denominator on timing (current, last 12 months or trailing or next 12 month of forward), share count (diluted, primary) and measurement (ordinary or extraordinary). In the graph below, I focus on
trailing earnings
for all companies in the S&P 500 and compute the aggregated PE ratio for the index to be 24.16 at the start of 2025, higher than the average value for that ratio in every decade going back to 1970.
Download data
Just for completeness, I compute two other variants of the PE, the first using
average earnings over the previous ten years
(normalized) and the second using the a
verage earnings over the last ten years, adjusted for inflation
(CAPE or Shiller PE). At the start of 2025, the normalized PE and CAPE also come in at well above historical norms.
If I have terrified you
with the PE story, and you have undoubtedly heard variants of this story from market experts and strategists for much of the last decade, I would hasten to add that investing on that basis would have kept you out of stocks for much of the last ten years, with catastrophic consequences for your portfolio. For some of this period, at least, you could justify the higher PE ratios with much lower treasury rates than historic norms,, and one way to see this is to compare the
earnings yield
, i.e., the inverse of the PE ratio, with the
treasury yields
, which is what I have done in the graph below:
Download data
If you compare the
earnings yield to the ten-year treasury rate
, you can see that for much of the last decade, going into 2022, the earnings yield, while low, was in excess of the ten-year rate. As rates have risen, though, the difference has narrowed, and at the start of 2025, the treasury rate exceeded the earnings yield. If you see market strategists or journalists talking about negative equity risk premiums, this (the difference between the earnings yield and the treasury rate) is the number that they are referencing.
At this stage, you may be ready to bail on stocks, but I have one final card to play. In a
post in 2023
, I talked about equity risk premiums, and the implicit assumptions that you make when you use the earning to price ratio as your measure of the expected return on stocks.
It works only if you make one of two assumptions:
That there will be
no growth in earnings in the futur
e, i.e., you will earn last year's earnings every year in perpetuity, making stocks into glorified bonds.
In a more subtle variants, there will be growth, but that growth will come from
investments that earn returns equal to the cost of equity
.
The problem with both assumptions is that they are in conflict with the data. First, the earnings on the S&P 500 companies has increased 6.58% a year between 2000 and 2024, making the no-growth assumption a non-started. Second, the return on equity for the S&P 500 companies was 20.61% in 2023, and has averaged 16.38% since 2000, both numbers well in excess of the cost of equity.
So, what is the alternative? Starting 30 years ago, I began estimating a more complete expected return on stocks, using the S&P 500, with the level of the index standing in for the price you pay for stocks, and expected earnings and cash flows, based upon consensus estimates of earnings and cash payout ratios. I solve for an internal rate of return for stocks, based upon these expected cash flows:
The expected return from this approach will be different from the earnings to price ratio because it incorporate expected growth and changes in cash flow patterns. The critique that this approach requires assumptions about the future (growth and cash flows) is disingenuous, since the earnings yield approach makes assumptions about both as well (no growth or no excess returns), and I will wager that the full ERP approach is on more defensible ground than the earning yield approach.
Using this approach at the start of 2025 to the S&P 500, I back out an i
mplied
expect return of 8.91% for the index, and an implied equity risk premium of 4.33%
(obtained by netting out the ten-year bond rate on Jan 1, 2025, of 4.58%):
Implied ERP calculation in 2025
You are welcome to take issue with the number that I use there, lowering the growth rates for the future or changing the assumptions about payout. That is a healthy debate, and one that provides far more room for nuance that looking at the earnings yield.
How does an implied equity risk premium play out in market level arguments? Every argument about markets (from them being in a bubble to basement level bargains) can be restated in terms of the equity risk premium. If you believe that the equity risk premium today (4.33%) is too low, you are, in effect, stating that stocks are overvalued, and if you view it as too high, you are taking the opposite position. If you are not in the market timing business, you take the current premium as a fair premium, and move on. To provide perspective on the ERP at the start of 2025, take a look at this
graph, that lists implied ERP at the start of each year going back to 1960:
Historical implied ERP
There is something here for almost point of view. If you are sanguine about stock market levels, you could point to the current premium (4.33%) being close to the historical average across the entire time period (4.25%). If you believe that stocks are over priced, you may base that on the current premium being lower than the average since 2005. I will not hide behind the "one hand, other hand" dance that so many strategists do. I think that we face significant volatility (inflation, tariffs, war) in the year to come, and I would be more comfortable with a higher ERP. At the same time, I don't fall into the bubble crowd, since the ERP is not 2%, as it was at the end of 1999.
Valuation Questions
Pulling together the disparate strands that are part of this post, I valued the index at the start of 2025, using the earnings expectations from analysts as the forecasted earnings for 2025 and 2026, before lowering growth rates to match the risk free rate in 2029. As the growth rates changes, I also adjust the payout ratios, given the return on equity for the S&P 500 companies:
Download spreadsheet
With the assumption that the equity risk premium will climb back to 4.5%, higher than the average for the 1960-2024 period, but lower than the post-2008 average, the value that I get for the index is about 5260, about 12% lower than the index at the start of the year. Note that this is a
value for the index today
, and if you wanted to adopt the market strategist approach of forecasting where the index will be a year from now, you would have to grow the value at the price appreciation portion (about 7.5%) of the expected return (which is 9.08%).
As I see it, there are two major dangers that lurk, with the first being
higher inflation
(translating into higher treasury rates) and the second being a
market crisis
that will push up the equity risk premium, since with those pieces in play, the index becomes much more significantly over valued. From an earnings perspective, the risk is that future earnings will come in well below expectations, either because the economy slows or because of trade frictions. Rather than wring my hands about these uncertainties, I fell back on a tool that I use when confronted with change, which is a simulation:
Crystal Ball used for simulations
While the base case conclusion that the market is overvalued stays intact, not surprising since my distributions for the input variables were centered on my base assumptions, there is a far richer set of output. Put simply, at today's price levels, there is an 80% chance that stocks are overvalued and only a 20% chance that they are undervalued. That said, though, if you are bullish, I can see a pathway to getting to a higher value, with higher earnings, lower interest rates and a continued decline in the equity risk premium. Conversely, you are bearish, I understand your point of view, especially if you see earnings shocks (from a recession or a tariff war), rising inflation or a market crisis coming up.
I don't dish out market advice, and as one whose market timing skills are questionable, you should not take my (or anyone else's) assessments at face value, especially heading into a year, where change will be the byword. It is possible that lower taxes and less regulation may cause to come in higher than expected, and that global investment fund flows will keep interest rates and equity risk premiums low. My advice is that you download the
valuation spreadsheet
, change the inputs to reflect your views of the world, and value the index yourself. Good investing requires taking ownership of the decisions and judgments you make, and I am glad to provide tools that help you in that process.
YouTube Video
Data Updates for 2025
Data Update 1 for 2025: The Draw (and Danger) of Data!
Data Update 2 for 2025: The Party continued for US Equities
Data Update 3 for 2025: The times they are a'changin'!
Data Update 4 for 2025: Interest Rates, Inflation and Central Banks!
Data Update 5 for 2025: It's a small world, after all!
Data Update 6 for 2025: From Macro to Micro - The Hurdle Rate Question!
Data Update 7 for 2025: The End Game in Business!
Data Update 8 for 2025: Debt, Taxes and Default - An Unholy Trifecta!
Data Update 9 for 2025: Dividend Policy - Inertia and Me-tooism Rule!
Datasets
Historical returns on stocks:
https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/pc/datasets/histretSP.xlsx
Historical implied ERP:
https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/pc/datasets/histimpl.xls
PE ratios for the S&P 500:
https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/pc/PEforS&P500updatedJan25.xlsx
Spreadsheets
Implied ERP at the start of 2025:
https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/pc/implprem/ERPJan25.xlsx
Valuation of the index on Jan 1, 2025:
https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/pc/blog/S&PValueJan2025.xlsx