Title: Data Update 9 for 2025: Dividends and Buybacks - Inertia and Me-tooism!
Source: Aswath Damodaran Valuation Blog
URL: https://aswathdamodaran.blogspot.com/2025/03/data-update-9-for-2025-dividends-and.html
Date: 2025-03-05T15:14:00-05:00
Author: Aswath Damodaran
Type: blog_post
Category: valuation

---

In my ninth (and last) data post for 2025, I look at cash returned by businesses across the world, looking at both the magnitude and the form of that return. I start with a framework for thinking about how much cash a business can return to its owners, and then argue that, in the real world, this decision is skewed by inertia and me-tooism. I also look at a clear and discernible shift away from dividends to stock buybacks, especially in the US, and examine both good and bad reasons for this shift. After reporting on the total cash returned during the year, by public companies, in the form of dividends and buybacks, I scale the cash returned to earnings (payout ratios) and to market cap (yield) and present the cross sectional distribution of both statistics across global companies.
The Cash Return Decision
The decision of whether to return cash, and how much to return, should, at least in principle, be the simplest of the three corporate finance decisions, since it does not involve the estimation uncertainties that go with investment decisions and the angst of trading of tax benefits against default risk implicit in financing decisions. In practice, though, there is probably more dysfunctionality in the cash return decision, than the other two, partly driven by deeply held, and often misguided views, of what returning cash to shareholders does or does not do to a business, and partly by the psychology that returning cash to shareholders is an admission that a company's growth days are numbered. In this section, I will start with a utopian vision, where I examine how cash return decisions should play out in a business and follow up with the reality, where bad dividend/cash return decisions can drive a business over a cliff.
The Utopian Version
If, as I asserted
in an earlier post
, equity investors have a claim the cash flows left over after all needs (from taxes to debt payments to reinvestment needs) are met, dividends should represent the end effect of all of those choices. In fact, in the utopian world where dividends are residual cash flows, here is the sequence you should expect to see at businesses:
In a residual dividend version of the world, companies will start with their cash flows from operations, supplement them with the debt that they think is right for them, invest that cash in good projects and the cash that is left over after all these needs have been met is available for cash return. Some of that cash will be held back in the company as a cash balance, but the balance can be returned either as dividends or in buybacks. If companies following this sequence to determine, here are the implications:
The cash returned
should not only vary from year to year
, with more (less) cash available for return in good (bad) years), but
also across firms
, as firms that struggle on profitability or have large reinvestment needs might find that not only do they not have any cash to return, but that they might have to raise fresh capital from equity investors to keep going.
It also follows that the
investment, financing, and dividend decisions
, at most firms, are interconnected, since for any given set of investments, borrowing more money will free up more cash flows to return to shareholders, and for any given financing, investing more back into the business will leave less in returnable cash flows.
Seen through this structure, you can compute potential dividends simply by looking for each of the cash flow elements along the way, starting with an add back of depreciation and non-cash charges to net income, and then netting out investment needs (capital expenditures, working capital, acquisitions) as well as cash flow from debt (new debt) and to debt (principal repayments).
While this measure of potential dividend has a fanciful name (free cash flow to equity), it is n
ot only just a measure of cash left in the till at the end of the year
, after all cash needs have been met, but one that is
easy to compute
, since every items on the list above should be in the statement of cash flows.
As with almost every other aspect of corporate finance, a company's capacity to return cash, i.e., pay potential dividends will vary as it moves through the corporate life cycle, and the graph below traces the path:
There are no surprises here, but it does illustrate how a business transitions from being a young company with negative free cash flows to equity (and thus dependent on equity issuances) to stay alive to one that has the capacity to start returning cash as it moves through the growth cycle before becoming a cash cow in maturity.
The Dysfunctional Version
In practice, though, there is no other aspect of corporate finance that is more dysfunctional than the cash return or dividend decision, partly because the latter (dividends) has acquired characteristics that get in the way of adopting a rational policy. In the early years of equity markets, in the late 1800s,  companies wooed investors who were used to investing in bonds with fixed coupons, by promising them predictable dividends as an alternative to the coupons. That practice has become embedded into companies, and
dividends continue to be sticky
, as can be seen by the number of companies that do not change dividends each year in the graph below:
While this graph is only of US companies, companies around the world have adopted variants of this sticky dividend policy, with the stickiness in absolute dividends (per share) in much of the world, and in payout ratios in Latin America. Put simply, at most companies, dividends this year will be equal to dividends last year, and if there is a change, it is more likely to be an increase than a decrease.
This stickiness in dividends has created several consequences for firms. First, f
irms are cautious in initiating dividends
, doing so only when they feel secure in their capacity to keep generate earnings. Second, since the
punishment for deviating from stickiness is far worse, when you cut dividends
, far more firms increase dividends than decrease them. Finally, there are companies that start paying sizable dividends, find
their businesses deteriorate under them
and cannot bring themselves to cut dividends. For these firms, dividends become the driving force, determining financing and investment decisions, rather than being determined by them.
This is, of course, dangerous to firm health, but g
iven a choice between the pain of announcing a dividend suspension (or cut) and being punished by the market and covering up operating problems by continuing to pay dividends
, many managers choose the latter, laying th e pathway to dividend madness.
Dividends versus Buybacks
As for the choice of how to return that cash, i.e., whether to pay dividends or buy back stock, the basics are simple.
Both actions (dividends and buybacks) have exactly the same effect on a company’s business picture
, reducing the cash held by the business and the equity (book and market) in the business. It is true that the investors who receive these cash flows may face different tax consequences and that while
neither action can create value
, buybacks have the potential to transfer wealth from one group of shareholders (either the ones that sell back or the ones who hold on) to the other, if the buyback price is set too low or too high.
It is undeniable that companies, especially in the United States, have shifted away from a policy of returning cash almost entirely in dividends until the early 1980s to one where the bulk of the cash is returned in buybacks. In the chart below, I show this shift by looking at the aggregated dividends and buybacks across S&P 500 companies from the mid-1980s to 2024:
While there are a number of reasons that you can point to for this shift, including tax benefits to investors, the rise of management options and shifting tastes among institutional investors, the primary reason, in my view, is that sticky dividends have outlived their usefulness, in a business age, where
fewer and fewer companies feel secure about their earning power
. Buybacks, in effect, are flexible dividends, since companies, when faced with headwinds, quickly reduce or cancel buybacks, while continuing to pay dividends: In the table below, I look at the differences between dividends and buybacks:
If earnings variability and unpredictability explains the shifting away from dividends, it stands to reason that this will not just be a US phenomenon, and that you will see buybacks increase across the world. In the next section, we will see if this is happening.
There are so many misconceptions about buybacks that I
did write a piece
that looks in detail at those reasons. I do want to reemphasize one of the delusions that both buyback supporters and opponents use, i.e., that buybacks create or destroy value. Thus, buyback supporters argue that a company that is
buying back its own shares at a price lower than its underlying value
, is effectively taking an investment with a positive net present value, and is thus creating value. That is not true, since that action just transfers value from shareholders who sell back (at the too low a price) to the shareholders who hold on to their shares. Similarly, buyback opponents note that many companies
buy back their shares, when their stock prices hit new highs, and thus risk paying too high a price
, relative to value, thus destroying value. This too is false, since paying too much for shares also is a wealth transfer, this time from those who remain shareholders in the firm to those who sell back their shares.
Cash Return in 2024
Given the push and pull between dividends as a residual cash flow, and the dysfunctional factors that cause companies to deviate from this end game, it is worth examining how much companies did return to their shareholders in 2024, across sectors and regions, to see which forces wins out.
Cash Return in 2024
Let's start with the headline numbers.
In 2024, companies across the globe returned $4.09 trillion in cash to their shareholders, with $2.56 trillion in dividends and $1.53 trillion taking the form of stock buybacks.
If you are wondering how the market can withstand this much cash being withdrawn, it is worth emphasizing an obvious, but oft overlooked fact, which is that
the bulk of this cash found its way back into the market, albeit into other companies.
In fact, a healthy market is built on cash being returned by some businesses (older, lower growth) and being plowed back into growth businesses that need that capital.
That lead in should be considered when you look at cash returned by companies, broken down by sector, in the table below, with the numbers reported both in US dollars and scaled to the earnings at these
companies:
To make the assessment, I first classified firms into money making and money losing, and aggregated the dividends and buybacks for each group, within each sector.  Not surprisingly,
the bulk of the cash bering returned is from money making firms,
but the percentages of firms that are money making does vary widely across sectors.
Utilities and financials
have the highest percentage of money makers on the list, and
financial service firms were the largest dividend payers
, paying $620.3 billion in dividends in 2024, followed by energy ($346.2 billion) and industrial ($305.3 billion). Scaled to net income,
dividend payout ratios were highest in the energy sector
and
technology companies had the lowest payout ratios
. T
echnology companies, with $280.4 billion, led the sectors in buyback
s, and almost 58% of the cash returned at money making companies in the sector took that form.
Breaking down global companies by region gives us a measure of variation on cash return across the world, both in magnitude and in the type of cash return:
It should come as no surprise that the
United States accounted for a large segment (more than $1.5 trillion) of cash returned by all companies, driven partly by a mature economy and partly by a more activist investor base, and that a preponderance of this cash (almost 60%) takes the form of buybacks
.
Indian companies return the lowest percentage (31.1%) of their earnings as cash to shareholders
, with the benign explanation being that they are reinvesting for growth and the not-so-benign reason being poor corporate governance. After all, in publicly traded companies, managers have the discretion to decide how much cash to return to shareholders, and in the absence of shareholder pressure, they, not surprisingly, hold on to cash, even if they do not have no need for it. It is also interesting that
buybacks seems to be making inroads in other paths of the world
, with even Chinese companies joining the party.
FCFE and Cash Return
While it is conventional practice to scale dividends to net income, to arrive at payout ratios, we did note, in the earlier section, that you can compute potential dividends from financial statements, Here again, I will start with the headline numbers again. In 2024, companies around the world collectively generated $1.66 trillion in free cash flows to equity:
As you can see in the figure, companies started with net income of $6,324 billion, reinvested $4,582 billion in capital expenditures and debt repayments exceeded debt issuances by $90 billion to arrive at the free cash flow to equity of $1.66 trillion. That said, companies managed to pay out $2,555 billion in dividends and bought back $1,525 billion in stock, a total cash return of almost $4.1 trillion.
As the aggregate numbers indicate, there are many companies with cash return that does not sync with potential dividends or earnings. In the picture below, we highlight four groups of companies, with the first two focused on dividends, relative to earnings, and the other two structured around cash returned relative to free cash flows to equity, where we look at mismatches.
Let's start with the net income/dividend match up. Across every region of the world,
17.5% of money losing companies continue to pay dividends, just as 31% of money-making companies choose not to pay dividends
. Using the free cash flows to equity to divide companies,
38% of companies with positive FCFE choose not to return any cash to their shareholder while 48% of firms with negative FCFE continue to pay dividends
. While all of these firms claim to have good reasons for their choices, and I have listed some of them, dividend dysfunction is alive and well in the data.
I argued earlier in this post that cash return policy varies as companies go through the life cycle, and to see if that holds, we broke down global companies into deciles, based upon corporate age, from youngest to oldest, and looked at the prevalence of dividends and buybacks in each group:
As you can see, a far higher percent of the
youngest companies are money-losing and have negative FCFE
, and it is thus not surprising that they have the
lowest percentage of firms that pay dividends or buy back stock.
As companies age, the likelihood of positive earnings and cash flows increases, as does the likelihood of dividend payments and stock buybacks.
Conclusion
While dividends are often described as residual cash flows, they have evolved over time to take on a more weighty meaning, and many companies have adopted dividend policies that are at odds with their capacity to return cash.
There are two forces that feed this dividend dysfunction. The first is
inertia,
where o
nce a company initiates a dividend policy, it is reluctant to back away from it, even though circumstances change. The second is
me-tooism
, where c
ompanies adopt cash return policies to match  their peer groups, paying dividends because other companies are also paying dividends, or buying back stock for the same reasons. These factors explain so much of what we see in companies and markets, but they are particularly effective in explaining the current cash return policies of companies.
YouTube
Data Updates for 2025
Data Update 1 for 2025: The Draw (and Danger) of Data!
Data Update 2 for 2025: The Party continued for US Equities
Data Update 3 for 2025: The times they are a'changin'!
Data Update 4 for 2025: Interest Rates, Inflation and Central Banks!
Data Update 5 for 2025: It's a small world, after all!
Data Update 6 for 2025: From Macro to Micro - The Hurdle Rate Question!
Data Update 7 for 2025: The End Game in Business!
Data Update 8 for 2025: Debt, Taxes and Default - An Unholy Trifecta!
Data Update 9 for 2025: Dividend Policy - Inertia and Me-tooism Rule!
Data Links
Dividend fundamentals, by industry (
US
,
Global
,
Emerging Markets
,
Europe
,
Japan
,
India
,
China)
Cash return and FCFE, by industry (
US
,
Global
,
Emerging Markets
,
Europe
,
Japan
,
India
,
China)